---
fingerprint: sha256:2dcb3a1a84e85e6df49f48e7091fed91fefaf51ec61e80795f0dd6366a7479cc
generated_at: '2026-05-05T08:27:33Z'
model: gpt-5.4
prompt_key: translate_journal_section_en
prompt_version: '1.0'
schema_version: '1.0'
tnh_scholar_generated: true
trace_id: 2a4a97fb28d64144b02fb9620011af97
---

Three Philosophical Tendencies in India and Buddhism’s Critique

At the time of the Buddha, the question of the principle underlying all things was one to which the intellectual world of India gave great attention. The Brahmajāla Sutta records as many as sixty-two different explanations advanced by the Indian philosophical schools of that period. Broadly speaking, however, we can discern the following three tendencies:

1.— The tendency of fatalism (Pubba-kata-hetu)

The philosophical schools belonging to this tendency held that both the natural world and the human world were arranged by predestination. Everything proceeded according to pre-existing natural laws. The value of human effort and material agency was not acknowledged here.

2. The tendency of theism or divine-volition theory (Issara-nimmāna-hetu)

The philosophical schools belonging to this tendency held that all things exist through the will of a divine being. This divine being was Brahmā, and the center of the schools belonging to this tendency was Brahmanism.

3.— The tendency of chance theory (Ahetu-apaccaya)

The philosophical schools belonging to this tendency did not acknowledge any principle of causality. All phenomena arose and existed by chance, without following any law or principle whatsoever.

The first and second tendencies assign all responsibility to a supernatural power. Personal responsibility here does not become an issue; fortune and misfortune alike are things that human beings cannot determine. Human actions, whether good or evil, are not the motive force behind success, failure, ruin, or accomplishment.

The third tendency likewise fails to establish a foundation for personal moral responsibility. If everything is merely accidental, then good is accidental, evil is accidental, and fortune and blessing are accidental as well; nothing remains to serve as a standard for human conduct. Consequently, human beings cannot gradually advance toward truth, beauty, and goodness; on the contrary, they may all too easily fall into sin and moral degradation.

From the theoretical point of view, the doctrines belonging to the above tendencies all contain many defects. From the standpoint of human life, the consequences they bring about are dark and discouraging. None of them can give human beings a settled ground on which to establish life and peace of mind; nor do they affirm the necessary and inherent capacities of the human person.

The Buddha’s standpoint was to expound the principle of the universe as the foundation for a way of life. That principle had to accord with the truth of the myriad phenomena, and that way of life had to lead human beings to the fulfillment of moral and religious value. The Buddha’s purpose in teaching the Dīrghāgama was not to overthrow the theories of others for its own sake, but simply to reject erroneous philosophical views that might obstruct the realization of morality and liberation in human beings.