---
fingerprint: sha256:5d6d02c1b4d78e9f4b45950b2b9cc0ede1e03fcc7640d31fa188881ec2c042f1
generated_at: '2026-05-06T21:02:36Z'
model: gpt-5.4
prompt_key: translate_journal_section_tnh_voice_en
prompt_version: '1.0'
schema_version: '1.0'
tnh_scholar_generated: true
trace_id: c5e6ba5cd3b64443b9ae21d2dee70bb5
---

Introduction and a Critique of Three Indian Philosophical Tendencies

In the time of the Buddha, the question of the fundamental principle of all things was one of the most important concerns in the world of Indian thought. The Brahmajāla Sutta records as many as sixty-two different explanations offered by the philosophical schools of that age. Taken together, we can see three main tendencies:

1. The tendency of Fatalism (Pubba-kata-hetu)

The schools belonging to this tendency held that everything in the natural world and the human world is arranged by predestination. All things proceed according to pre-existing natural laws. The value of human effort and material means is not recognized here.

2. The tendency of Theism, or Divine Will (Issara-nimmāna-hetu)

The schools belonging to this tendency maintained that all things exist through the will of a divine being. This divine being is Brahmā, and the center of the schools in this tendency is Brahmanism.

3. The tendency of Chance, or Causelessness (Ahetu-apaccaya)

The schools belonging to this tendency did not accept the principle of cause and effect. All phenomena arise and exist by chance, without following any law or principle at all.

The first and second tendencies place all responsibility in the hands of a supernatural power. Personal responsibility does not become a real question here; misfortune and blessing alike are things that human beings cannot determine. Human actions, whether wholesome or unwholesome, are not seen as the motive force behind success or failure, flourishing or decline.

The third tendency also cannot establish any foundation for personal moral responsibility. If everything is merely accidental, then good is accidental, evil is accidental, misfortune and blessing are accidental as well; there is nothing that can serve as a standard for human conduct. Because of that, human beings cannot gradually move toward truth, beauty, and goodness. On the contrary, they can very easily slide down into wrongdoing and dissipation.

From the standpoint of reasoning, the doctrines belonging to these tendencies contain many shortcomings. From the standpoint of human life, the consequences they bring are dark and discouraging. None of them can give a human being true peace on which to establish one’s life, nor do they affirm the necessary capacities already present within the human person.

The Buddha’s position was to illuminate the principle of the universe in order to lay the foundation for a way of human living. That principle had to accord with the truth of the countless phenomena, and that way of life had to lead the human being to the fulfillment of moral and religious value. The Buddha’s purpose in teaching the Dīrgha Āgama was not to attack the theoretical systems of others, but only to reject mistaken philosophical views that could obstruct the realization of morality and liberation in human life.
