---
fingerprint: sha256:2dcb3a1a84e85e6df49f48e7091fed91fefaf51ec61e80795f0dd6366a7479cc
generated_at: '2026-05-06T21:02:25Z'
model: gpt-5.4
prompt_key: translate_journal_section_en
prompt_version: '1.0'
schema_version: '1.0'
tnh_scholar_generated: true
trace_id: accf88d5b23d433d8a87963b858d35e0
---

The Synthetic Meaning of Cause and Effect and the Vision of Interpenetrating Dependent Origination

In sum, the Buddhist conception of cause and effect, in its narrow sense, is simply the law of causality (loi de causalité); but in its broader sense, it is not merely a set of causal relations of a purely theoretical nature. The Buddhist conception of cause and effect embraces moral and soteriological relations as well; in breadth it extends throughout the ten directions, and in length it penetrates past, future, and present. The “one” is intimately connected with the “all,” and the “all” may be understood through the “one.”

An ancient Vietnamese Zen master expressed this principle in two marvelous lines:

“If there is, there is, down to the motes of dust;
If there is no emptiness, then nothing at all is empty.”

Translated:

“If there is, there is from the tiniest speck;
If there is not, then this whole world too is not.”

A single particle of dust may be small, yet it exists only through its relation to the whole. The whole may be vast, yet if it loses its relation to that tiny particle of dust, it cannot be established. Thus another Zen master of the Lý dynasty wrote:

“The whole universe rests upon the tip of a hair;
The sun and moon are contained within a mustard seed.”

(Heaven and earth drawn into a tiny hair-tip,
Sun and moon lying within a minute mustard seed.)

Greatness and smallness here are no longer greatness and smallness. A mustard seed, though tiny, is established upon its relation to the whole. The entire universe has come together to bring it into being, just as it has come together with the entire universe to bring forth the sun and moon. If it is, then all is; if it is not, then all is not. “Heaven and earth can be contained on the tip of a single hair” is precisely this meaning.

The world, the universe, and the myriad kinds of beings are woven together by endless, interlayered systems of causes and conditions. This is the fundamental and profound insight of Buddhism. Upon this insight are established transcendent systems of doctrine and wondrous methods of practice. Modern science has already moved beyond a simple, one-directional notion of causality and has drawn close to the Buddhist view of interpenetrating dependent origination. We may hope that one day the torch of the teaching of causes and conditions will shine forth in full brilliance, continuing to dispel notions of fatalism, chance, and divine creation, so that humankind may soon come to recognize its path.