---
fingerprint: sha256:2dcb3a1a84e85e6df49f48e7091fed91fefaf51ec61e80795f0dd6366a7479cc
generated_at: '2026-05-06T21:04:16Z'
model: gpt-5.4
prompt_key: translate_journal_section_en
prompt_version: '1.0'
schema_version: '1.0'
tnh_scholar_generated: true
trace_id: 8dc8518e6afe4ae28d8f15228b3d3db0
---

The Worldview of Conditionality and the Principle of Dependent Arising

The worldview taught by the Buddha is a worldview of conditionality (Paticca-samuppada). All phenomena depend upon one another for their establishment. All are intimately related to one another. Without that interrelation, not a single thing could be established. That interrelation is precisely called causes and conditions. In the scriptures, the terms CAUSE (hetu), CONDITION (paccaya), CONDITIONING FACTOR (nidana), and ARISING (samudaya) are all different names indicating that relation. The Buddha defined conditionality as follows:

“If this exists, that exists; if this arises, that arises; if this is absent, that is absent; if this ceases, that ceases.

(* If this is, then that is; if this arises, then that arises; if this is not, then that is not; if this ceases, then that ceases. ...)”

To say, “If this exists, that exists; if this is absent, that is absent,” is to present the relation among things existing simultaneously. To say, “If this arises, that arises; if this ceases, that ceases,” is to present the relation among things existing at different times. All dharmas arise, cease, and exist within that very close web of mutual interrelation; no dharma (phenomenon) can exist independently or absolutely. When the cause comes first and the effect later, this is called temporally distinct causation; when cause and effect occur at the same time, this is called simultaneous causation. One cause may have different effects depending on the accompanying subsidiary conditions. Therefore, there can be no absolute cause, and there can also be no absolute effect.

The world is woven out of systems of simultaneous conditionality (from the standpoint of space) and systems of temporally distinct conditionality (from the standpoint of time). This is the Buddhist conception of causality. In the sutras and treatises, the term conditioned dharmas (samkhata dhamma) refers precisely to the phenomena of this world of causes and conditions. All are impermanent and changing, precisely because of conditional interrelation; for within the world of conditionality, there can be no phenomena that are permanent or eternal. It is on the basis of this conception of dependent arising that Buddhism rejects the idea of the world’s creation by a self-possessed Supreme God. This is something we cannot fail to acknowledge.

According to the Huayan school, the whole universe is an endlessly layered system of interpenetrating dependent arising. Huayan doctrine, in this way, was established upon the causal vision of the Agamas. The Abhidharma works of Southern Buddhism also classified causes and conditions for the purposes of observation and inquiry, and this too was precisely the principal task of the Sthavira scholastics. (The Mahapakarana distinguishes as many as 24 conditions; fascicle 25 of the Sariputra Abhidharma Treatise distinguishes 10 conditions; the Sarvastivada maintains 4 conditions.)

Here, we shall only briefly examine two types: temporally distinct causation and simultaneous causation.